<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      IX. William
    </h2>
<p>
      MRS. TODD HAD taken the onion out of her basket and laid it down upon the
      kitchen table. “There's Johnny Bowden come with us, you know,” she
      reminded her mother. “He'll be hungry enough to eat his size.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I've got new doughnuts, dear,” said the little old lady. “You don't often
      catch William 'n' me out o' provisions. I expect you might have chose a
      somewhat larger fish, but I'll try an' make it do. I shall have to have a
      few extra potatoes, but there's a field full out there, an' the hoe's
      leanin' against the well-house, in 'mongst the climbin'-beans.” She smiled
      and gave her daughter a commanding nod.
    </p>
<p>
      “Land sakes alive! Le's blow the horn for William,” insisted Mrs. Todd,
      with some excitement. “He needn't break his spirit so far's to come in.
      He'll know you need him for something particular, an' then we can call to
      him as he comes up the path. I won't put him to no pain.”
     </p>
<p>
      Mrs. Blackett's old face, for the first time, wore a look of trouble, and
      I found it necessary to counteract the teasing spirit of Almira. It was
      too pleasant to stay indoors altogether, even in such rewarding
      companionship; besides, I might meet William; and, straying out presently,
      I found the hoe by the well-house and an old splint basket at the woodshed
      door, and also found my way down to the field where there was a great
      square patch of rough, weedy potato-tops and tall ragweed. One corner was
      already dug, and I chose a fat-looking hill where the tops were well
      withered. There is all the pleasure that one can have in gold-digging in
      finding one's hopes satisfied in the riches of a good hill of potatoes. I
      longed to go on; but it did not seem frugal to dig any longer after my
      basket was full, and at last I took my hoe by the middle and lifted the
      basket to go back up the hill. I was sure that Mrs. Blackett must be
      waiting impatiently to slice the potatoes into the chowder, layer after
      layer, with the fish.
    </p>
<p>
      “You let me take holt o' that basket, ma'am,” said the pleasant, anxious
      voice behind me.
    </p>
<p>
      I turned, startled in the silence of the wide field, and saw an elderly
      man, bent in the shoulders as fishermen often are, gray-headed and
      clean-shaven, and with a timid air. It was William. He looked just like
      his mother, and I had been imagining that he was large and stout like his
      sister, Almira Todd; and, strange to say, my fancy had led me to picture
      him not far from thirty and a little loutish. It was necessary instead to
      pay William the respect due to age.
    </p>
<p>
      I accustomed myself to plain facts on the instant, and we said
      good-morning like old friends. The basket was really heavy, and I put the
      hoe through its handle and offered him one end; then we moved easily
      toward the house together, speaking of the fine weather and of mackerel
      which were reported to be striking in all about the bay. William had been
      out since three o'clock, and had taken an extra fare of fish. I could feel
      that Mrs. Todd's eyes were upon us as we approached the house, and
      although I fell behind in the narrow path, and let William take the basket
      alone and precede me at some little distance the rest of the way, I could
      plainly hear her greet him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Got round to comin' in, didn't you?” she inquired, with amusement. “Well,
      now, that's clever. Didn't know's I should see you to-day, William, an' I
      wanted to settle an account.”
     </p>
<p>
      I felt somewhat disturbed and responsible, but when I joined them they
      were on most simple and friendly terms. It became evident that, with
      William, it was the first step that cost, and that, having once joined in
      social interests, he was able to pursue them with more or less pleasure.
      He was about sixty, and not young-looking for his years, yet so undying is
      the spirit of youth, and bashfulness has such a power of survival, that I
      felt all the time as if one must try to make the occasion easy for some
      one who was young and new to the affairs of social life. He asked politely
      if I would like to go up to the great ledge while dinner was getting
      ready; so, not without a deep sense of pleasure, and a delighted look of
      surprise from the two hostesses, we started, William and I, as if both of
      us felt much younger than we looked. Such was the innocence and simplicity
      of the moment that when I heard Mrs. Todd laughing behind us in the
      kitchen I laughed too, but William did not even blush. I think he was a
      little deaf, and he stepped along before me most businesslike and intent
      upon his errand.
    </p>
<p>
      We went from the upper edge of the field above the house into a smooth,
      brown path among the dark spruces. The hot sun brought out the fragrance
      of the pitchy bark, and the shade was pleasant as we climbed the hill.
      William stopped once or twice to show me a great wasps'-nest close by, or
      some fishhawks'-nests below in a bit of swamp. He picked a few sprigs of
      late-blooming linnaea as we came out upon an open bit of pasture at the
      top of the island, and gave them to me without speaking, but he knew as
      well as I that one could not say half he wished about linnaea. Through
      this piece of rough pasture ran a huge shape of stone like the great
      backbone of an enormous creature. At the end, near the woods, we could
      climb up on it and walk along to the highest point; there above the circle
      of pointed firs we could look down over all the island, and could see the
      ocean that circled this and a hundred other bits of island ground, the
      mainland shore and all the far horizons. It gave a sudden sense of space,
      for nothing stopped the eye or hedged one in,—that sense of liberty
      in space and time which great prospects always give.
    </p>
<p>
      “There ain't no such view in the world, I expect,” said William proudly,
      and I hastened to speak my heartfelt tribute of praise; it was impossible
      not to feel as if an untraveled boy had spoken, and yet one loved to have
      him value his native heath.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2H_4_0010" name="link2H_4_0010">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
