<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h2>
      I. The Return
    </h2>
<p>
      THERE WAS SOMETHING about the coast town of Dunnet which made it seem more
      attractive than other maritime villages of eastern Maine. Perhaps it was
      the simple fact of acquaintance with that neighborhood which made it so
      attaching, and gave such interest to the rocky shore and dark woods, and
      the few houses which seemed to be securely wedged and tree-nailed in among
      the ledges by the Landing. These houses made the most of their seaward
      view, and there was a gayety and determined floweriness in their bits of
      garden ground; the small-paned high windows in the peaks of their steep
      gables were like knowing eyes that watched the harbor and the far sea-line
      beyond, or looked northward all along the shore and its background of
      spruces and balsam firs. When one really knows a village like this and its
      surroundings, it is like becoming acquainted with a single person. The
      process of falling in love at first sight is as final as it is swift in
      such a case, but the growth of true friendship may be a lifelong affair.
    </p>
<p>
      After a first brief visit made two or three summers before in the course
      of a yachting cruise, a lover of Dunnet Landing returned to find the
      unchanged shores of the pointed firs, the same quaintness of the village
      with its elaborate conventionalities; all that mixture of remoteness, and
      childish certainty of being the centre of civilization of which her
      affectionate dreams had told. One evening in June, a single passenger
      landed upon the steamboat wharf. The tide was high, there was a fine crowd
      of spectators, and the younger portion of the company followed her with
      subdued excitement up the narrow street of the salt-aired,
      white-clapboarded little town.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2H_4_0002" name="link2H_4_0002">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
