<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17: A Country Road</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Country Road</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Whatever doubts and anxieties I may have had about the inconvenience of the Begg’s high wagon for a person of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett’s age and shortness, they were happily overcome by the aid of a chair and her own valiant spirit. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd bestowed great care upon seating us as if we were taking passage by boat, but she finally pronounced that we were properly trimmed. When we had gone only a little way up the hill she remembered that she had left the house door wide open, though the large key was safe in her pocket. I offered to run back, but my offer was met with lofty scorn, and we lightly dismissed the matter from our minds, until two or three miles further on we met the doctor, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd asked him to stop and ask her nearest neighbor to step over and close the door if the dust seemed to blow in the afternoon.</p>
			<p>“She’ll be there in her kitchen; she’ll hear you the minute you call; ’twont give you no delay,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd to the doctor. “Yes, Mis’ Dennett’s right there, with the windows all open. It isn’t as if my fore door opened right on the road, anyway.” At which proof of composure <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett smiled wisely at me.</p>
			<p>The doctor seemed delighted to see our guest; they were evidently the warmest friends, and I saw a look of affectionate confidence in their eyes. The good man left his carriage to speak to us, but as he took <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett’s hand he held it a moment, and, as if merely from force of habit, felt her pulse as they talked; then to my delight he gave the firm old wrist a commending pat.</p>
			<p>“You’re wearing well; good for another ten years at this rate,” he assured her cheerfully, and she smiled back. “I like to keep a strict account of my old standbys,” and he turned to me. “Don’t you let <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd overdo today⁠—old folks like her are apt to be thoughtless;” and then we all laughed, and, parting, went our ways gayly.</p>
			<p>“I suppose he puts up with your rivalry the same as ever?” asked <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett. “You and he are as friendly as ever, I see, Almiry,” and Almira sagely nodded.</p>
			<p>“He’s got too many long routes now to stop to ’tend to all his door patients,” she said, “especially them that takes pleasure in talkin’ themselves over. The doctor and me have got to be kind of partners; he’s gone a good deal, far an’ wide. Looked tired, didn’t he? I shall have to advise with him an’ get him off for a good rest. He’ll take the big boat from Rockland an’ go off up to Boston an’ mouse round among the other doctors, one in two or three years, and come home fresh as a boy. I guess they think consider’ble of him up there.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd shook the reins and reached determinedly for the whip, as if she were compelling public opinion.</p>
			<p>Whatever energy and spirit the white horse had to begin with were soon exhausted by the steep hills and his discernment of a long expedition ahead. We toiled slowly along. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett and I sat together, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd sat alone in front with much majesty and the large basket of provisions. Part of the way the road was shaded by thick woods, but we also passed one farmhouse after another on the high uplands, which we all three regarded with deep interest, the house itself and the barns and garden-spots and poultry all having to suffer an inspection of the shrewdest sort. This was a highway quite new to me; in fact, most of my journeys with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd had been made afoot and between the roads, in open pasturelands. My friends stopped several times for brief dooryard visits, and made so many promises of stopping again on the way home that I began to wonder how long the expedition would last. I had often noticed how warmly <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd was greeted by her friends, but it was hardly to be compared with the feeling now shown toward <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett. A look of delight came to the faces of those who recognized the plain, dear old figure beside me; one revelation after another was made of the constant interest and intercourse that had linked the far island and these scattered farms into a golden chain of love and dependence.</p>
			<p>“Now, we mustn’t stop again if we can help it,” insisted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd at last. “You’ll get tired, mother, and you’ll think the less o’ reunions. We can visit along here any day. There, if they ain’t frying doughnuts in this next house, too! These are new folks, you know, from over <abbr>St.</abbr> George way; they took this old Talcot farm last year. ’Tis the best water on the road, and the checkrein’s come undone⁠—yes, we’d best delay a little and water the horse.”</p>
			<p>We stopped, and seeing a party of pleasure-seekers in holiday attire, the thin, anxious mistress of the farmhouse came out with wistful sympathy to hear what news we might have to give. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett first spied her at the half-closed door, and asked with such cheerful directness if we were trespassing that, after a few words, she went back to her kitchen and reappeared with a plateful of doughnuts.</p>
			<p>“Entertainment for man and beast,” announced <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd with satisfaction. “Why, we’ve perceived there was new doughnuts all along the road, but you’re the first that has treated us.”</p>
			<p>Our new acquaintance flushed with pleasure, but said nothing.</p>
			<p>“They’re very nice; you’ve had good luck with ’em,” pronounced <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd. “Yes, we’ve observed there was doughnuts all the way along; if one house is frying all the rest is; ’tis so with a great many things.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t suppose likely you’re goin’ up to the Bowden reunion?” asked the hostess as the white horse lifted his head and we were saying goodbye.</p>
			<p>“Why, yes,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd and I, all together.</p>
			<p>“I am connected with the family. Yes, I expect to be there this afternoon. I’ve been lookin’ forward to it,” she told us eagerly.</p>
			<p>“We shall see you there. Come and sit with us if it’s convenient,” said dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett, and we drove away.</p>
			<p>“I wonder who she was before she was married?” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd, who was usually unerring in matters of genealogy. “She must have been one of that remote branch that lived down beyond Thomaston. We can find out this afternoon. I expect that the families’ll march together, or be sorted out some way. I’m willing to own a relation that has such proper ideas of doughnuts.”</p>
			<p>“I seem to see the family looks,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett. “I wish we’d asked her name. She’s a stranger, and I want to help make it pleasant for all such.”</p>
			<p>“She resembles Cousin Pa’lina Bowden about the forehead,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd with decision.</p>
			<p>We had just passed a piece of woodland that shaded the road, and come out to some open fields beyond, when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd suddenly reined in the horse as if somebody had stood on the roadside and stopped her. She even gave that quick reassuring nod of her head which was usually made to answer for a bow, but I discovered that she was looking eagerly at a tall ash-tree that grew just inside the field fence.</p>
			<p>“I thought ’twas goin’ to do well,” she said complacently as we went on again. “Last time I was up this way that tree was kind of drooping and discouraged. Grown trees act that way sometimes, same’s folks; then they’ll put right to it and strike their roots off into new ground and start all over again with real good courage. Ash-trees is very likely to have poor spells; they ain’t got the resolution of other trees.”</p>
			<p>I listened hopefully for more; it was this peculiar wisdom that made one value <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd’s pleasant company.</p>
			<p>“There’s sometimes a good hearty tree growin’ right out of the bare rock, out o’ some crack that just holds the roots;” she went on to say, “right on the pitch o’ one o’ them bare stony hills where you can’t seem to see a wheel-barrowful o’ good earth in a place, but that tree’ll keep a green top in the driest summer. You lay your ear down to the ground an’ you’ll hear a little stream runnin’. Every such tree has got its own livin’ spring; there’s folk made to match ’em.”</p>
			<p>I could not help turning to look at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett, close beside me. Her hands were clasped placidly in their thin black woolen gloves, and she was looking at the flowery wayside as we went slowly along, with a pleased, expectant smile. I do not think she had heard a word about the trees.</p>
			<p>“I just saw a nice plant o’ elecampane growin’ back there,” she said presently to her daughter.</p>
			<p>“I haven’t got my mind on herbs today,” responded <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd, in the most matter-of-fact way. “I’m bent on seeing folks,” and she shook the reins again.</p>
			<p>I for one had no wish to hurry, it was so pleasant in the shady roads. The woods stood close to the road on the right; on the left were narrow fields and pastures where there were as many acres of spruces and pines as there were acres of bay and juniper and huckleberry, with a little turf between. When I thought we were in the heart of the inland country, we reached the top of a hill, and suddenly there lay spread out before us a wonderful great view of well-cleared fields that swept down to the wide water of a bay. Beyond this were distant shores like another country in the midday haze which half hid the hills beyond, and the faraway pale blue mountains on the northern horizon. There was a schooner with all sails set coming down the bay from a white village that was sprinkled on the shore, and there were many sailboats flitting about it. It was a noble landscape, and my eyes, which had grown used to the narrow inspection of a shaded roadside, could hardly take it in.</p>
			<p>“Why, it’s the upper bay,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd. “You can see ’way over into the town of Fessenden. Those farms ’way over there are all in Fessenden. Mother used to have a sister that lived up that shore. If we started as early’s we could on a summer mornin’, we couldn’t get to her place from Green Island till late afternoon, even with a fair, steady breeze, and you had to strike the time just right so as to fetch up ’long o’ the tide and land near the flood. ’Twas ticklish business, an’ we didn’t visit back an’ forth as much as mother desired. You have to go ’way down the co’st to Cold Spring Light an’ round that long point⁠—up here’s what they call the Back Shore.”</p>
			<p>“No, we were ’most always separated, my dear sister and me, after the first year she was married,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett. “We had our little families an’ plenty o’ cares. We were always lookin’ forward to the time we could see each other more. Now and then she’d get out to the island for a few days while her husband’d go fishin’; and once he stopped with her an’ two children, and made him some flakes right there and cured all his fish for winter. We did have a beautiful time together, sister an’ me; she used to look back to it long’s she lived.</p>
			<p>“I do love to look over there where she used to live,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett went on as we began to go down the hill. “It seems as if she must still be there, though she’s long been gone. She loved their farm⁠—she didn’t see how I got so used to our island; but somehow I was always happy from the first.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it’s very dull to me up among those slow farms,” declared <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd. “The snow troubles ’em in winter. They’re all besieged by winter, as you may say; ’tis far better by the shore than up among such places. I never thought I should like to live up country.”</p>
			<p>“Why, just see the carriages ahead of us on the next rise!” exclaimed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett. “There’s going to be a great gathering, don’t you believe there is, Almiry? It hasn’t seemed up to now as if anybody was going but us. An’ ’tis such a beautiful day, with yesterday cool and pleasant to work an’ get ready, I shouldn’t wonder if everybody was there, even the slow ones like Phebe Ann Brock.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett’s eyes were bright with excitement, and even <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd showed remarkable enthusiasm. She hurried the horse and caught up with the holidaymakers ahead. “There’s all the Dep’fords goin’, six in the wagon,” she told us joyfully; “an’ Mis’ Alva Tilley’s folks are now risin’ the hill in their new carryall.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackett pulled at the neat bow of her black bonnet-strings, and tied them again with careful precision. “I believe your bonnet’s on a little bit sideways, dear,” she advised <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd as if she were a child; but <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Todd was too much occupied to pay proper heed. We began to feel a new sense of gayety and of taking part in the great occasion as we joined the little train.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
