<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      XII. A Strange Sail
    </h2>
<p>
      EXCEPT FOR a few stray guests, islanders or from the inland country, to
      whom Mrs. Todd offered the hospitalities of a single meal, we were quite
      by ourselves all summer; and when there were signs of invasion, late in
      July, and a certain Mrs. Fosdick appeared like a strange sail on the far
      horizon, I suffered much from apprehension. I had been living in the
      quaint little house with as much comfort and unconsciousness as if it were
      a larger body, or a double shell, in whose simple convolutions Mrs. Todd
      and I had secreted ourselves, until some wandering hermit crab of a
      visitor marked the little spare room for her own. Perhaps now and then a
      castaway on a lonely desert island dreads the thought of being rescued. I
      heard of Mrs. Fosdick for the first time with a selfish sense of
      objection; but after all, I was still vacation-tenant of the schoolhouse,
      where I could always be alone, and it was impossible not to sympathize
      with Mrs. Todd, who, in spite of some preliminary grumbling, was really
      delighted with the prospect of entertaining an old friend.
    </p>
<p>
      For nearly a month we received occasional news of Mrs. Fosdick, who seemed
      to be making a royal progress from house to house in the inland
      neighborhood, after the fashion of Queen Elizabeth. One Sunday after
      another came and went, disappointing Mrs. Todd in the hope of seeing her
      guest at church and fixing the day for the great visit to begin; but Mrs.
      Fosdick was not ready to commit herself to a date. An assurance of “some
      time this week” was not sufficiently definite from a free-footed
      housekeeper's point of view, and Mrs. Todd put aside all herb-gathering
      plans, and went through the various stages of expectation, provocation,
      and despair. At last she was ready to believe that Mrs. Fosdick must have
      forgotten her promise and returned to her home, which was vaguely said to
      be over Thomaston way. But one evening, just as the supper-table was
      cleared and “readied up,” and Mrs. Todd had put her large apron over her
      head and stepped forth for an evening stroll in the garden, the unexpected
      happened. She heard the sound of wheels, and gave an excited cry to me, as
      I sat by the window, that Mrs. Fosdick was coming right up the street.
    </p>
<p>
      “She may not be considerate, but she's dreadful good company,” said Mrs.
      Todd hastily, coming back a few steps from the neighborhood of the gate.
      “No, she ain't a mite considerate, but there's a small lobster left over
      from your tea; yes, it's a real mercy there's a lobster. Susan Fosdick
      might just as well have passed the compliment o' comin' an hour ago.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps she has had her supper,” I ventured to suggest, sharing the
      housekeeper's anxiety, and meekly conscious of an inconsiderate appetite
      for my own supper after a long expedition up the bay. There were so few
      emergencies of any sort at Dunnet Landing that this one appeared
      overwhelming.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, she's rode 'way over from Nahum Brayton's place. I expect they were
      busy on the farm, and couldn't spare the horse in proper season. You just
      sly out an' set the teakittle on again, dear, an' drop in a good han'ful
      o' chips; the fire's all alive. I'll take her right up to lay off her
      things, as she'll be occupied with explanations an' gettin' her bunnit
      off, so you'll have plenty o' time. She's one I shouldn't like to have
      find me unprepared.”
     </p>
<p>
      Mrs. Fosdick was already at the gate, and Mrs. Todd now turned with an air
      of complete surprise and delight to welcome her.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why, Susan Fosdick,” I heard her exclaim in a fine unhindered voice, as
      if she were calling across a field, “I come near giving of you up! I was
      afraid you'd gone an' 'portioned out my visit to somebody else. I s'pose
      you've been to supper?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Lor', no, I ain't, Almiry Todd,” said Mrs. Fosdick cheerfully, as she
      turned, laden with bags and bundles, from making her adieux to the boy
      driver. “I ain't had a mite o' supper, dear. I've been lottin' all the way
      on a cup o' that best tea o' yourn,—some o' that Oolong you keep in
      the little chist. I don't want none o' your useful herbs.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I keep that tea for ministers' folks,” gayly responded Mrs. Todd. “Come
      right along in, Susan Fosdick. I declare if you ain't the same old
      sixpence!”
     </p>
<p>
      As they came up the walk together, laughing like girls, I fled, full of
      cares, to the kitchen, to brighten the fire and be sure that the lobster,
      sole dependence of a late supper, was well out of reach of the cat. There
      proved to be fine reserves of wild raspberries and bread and butter, so
      that I regained my composure, and waited impatiently for my own share of
      this illustrious visit to begin. There was an instant sense of high
      festivity in the evening air from the moment when our guest had so frankly
      demanded the Oolong tea.
    </p>
<p>
      The great moment arrived. I was formally presented at the stair-foot, and
      the two friends passed on to the kitchen, where I soon heard a hospitable
      clink of crockery and the brisk stirring of a tea-cup. I sat in my
      high-backed rocking-chair by the window in the front room with an
      unreasonable feeling of being left out, like the child who stood at the
      gate in Hans Andersen's story. Mrs. Fosdick did not look, at first sight,
      like a person of great social gifts. She was a serious-looking little bit
      of an old woman, with a birdlike nod of the head. I had often been told
      that she was the “best hand in the world to make a visit,”—as if to
      visit were the highest of vocations; that everybody wished for her, while
      few could get her; and I saw that Mrs. Todd felt a comfortable sense of
      distinction in being favored with the company of this eminent person who
      “knew just how.” It was certainly true that Mrs. Fosdick gave both her
      hostess and me a warm feeling of enjoyment and expectation, as if she had
      the power of social suggestion to all neighboring minds.
    </p>
<p>
      The two friends did not reappear for at least an hour. I could hear their
      busy voices, loud and low by turns, as they ranged from public to
      confidential topics. At last Mrs. Todd kindly remembered me and returned,
      giving my door a ceremonious knock before she stepped in, with the small
      visitor in her wake. She reached behind her and took Mrs. Fosdick's hand
      as if she were young and bashful, and gave her a gentle pull forward.
    </p>
<p>
      “There, I don't know whether you're goin' to take to each other or not;
      no, nobody can't tell whether you'll suit each other, but I expect you'll
      get along some way, both having seen the world,” said our affectionate
      hostess. “You can inform Mis' Fosdick how we found the folks out to Green
      Island the other day. She's always been well acquainted with mother. I'll
      slip out now an' put away the supper things an' set my bread to rise, if
      you'll both excuse me. You can come an' keep me company when you get
      ready, either or both.” And Mrs. Todd, large and amiable, disappeared and
      left us.
    </p>
<p>
      Being furnished not only with a subject of conversation, but with a safe
      refuge in the kitchen in case of incompatibility, Mrs. Fosdick and I sat
      down, prepared to make the best of each other. I soon discovered that she,
      like many of the elder women of the coast, had spent a part of her life at
      sea, and was full of a good traveler's curiosity and enlightenment. By the
      time we thought it discreet to join our hostess we were already sincere
      friends.
    </p>
<p>
      You may speak of a visit's setting in as well as a tide's, and it was
      impossible, as Mrs. Todd whispered to me, not to be pleased at the way
      this visit was setting in; a new impulse and refreshing of the social
      currents and seldom visited bays of memory appeared to have begun. Mrs.
      Fosdick had been the mother of a large family of sons and daughters,—sailors
      and sailors' wives,—and most of them had died before her. I soon
      grew more or less acquainted with the histories of all their fortunes and
      misfortunes, and subjects of an intimate nature were no more withheld from
      my ears than if I had been a shell on the mantelpiece. Mrs. Fosdick was
      not without a touch of dignity and elegance; she was fashionable in her
      dress, but it was a curiously well-preserved provincial fashion of some
      years back. In a wider sphere one might have called her a woman of the
      world, with her unexpected bits of modern knowledge, but Mrs. Todd's
      wisdom was an intimation of truth itself. She might belong to any age,
      like an idyl of Theocritus; but while she always understood Mrs. Fosdick,
      that entertaining pilgrim could not always understand Mrs. Todd.
    </p>
<p>
      That very first evening my friends plunged into a borderless sea of
      reminiscences and personal news. Mrs. Fosdick had been staying with a
      family who owned the farm where she was born, and she had visited every
      sunny knoll and shady field corner; but when she said that it might be for
      the last time, I detected in her tone something expectant of the
      contradiction which Mrs. Todd promptly offered.
    </p>
<p>
      “Almiry,” said Mrs. Fosdick, with sadness, “you may say what you like, but
      I am one of nine brothers and sisters brought up on the old place, and
      we're all dead but me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Your sister Dailey ain't gone, is she? Why, no, Louisa ain't gone!”
       exclaimed Mrs. Todd, with surprise. “Why, I never heard of that
      occurrence!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes'm; she passed away last October, in Lynn. She had made her distant
      home in Vermont State, but she was making a visit to her youngest
      daughter. Louisa was the only one of my family whose funeral I wasn't able
      to attend, but 'twas a mere accident. All the rest of us were settled
      right about home. I thought it was very slack of 'em in Lynn not to fetch
      her to the old place; but when I came to hear about it, I learned that
      they'd recently put up a very elegant monument, and my sister Dailey was
      always great for show. She'd just been out to see the monument the week
      before she was taken down, and admired it so much that they felt sure of
      her wishes.”
     </p>
<p>
      “So she's really gone, and the funeral was up to Lynn!” repeated Mrs.
      Todd, as if to impress the sad fact upon her mind. “She was some years
      younger than we be, too. I recollect the first day she ever came to
      school; 'twas that first year mother sent me inshore to stay with aunt
      Topham's folks and get my schooling. You fetched little Louisa to school
      one Monday mornin' in a pink dress an' her long curls, and she set between
      you an' me, and got cryin' after a while, so the teacher sent us home with
      her at recess.”
     </p>
<p>
      “She was scared of seeing so many children about her; there was only her
      and me and brother John at home then; the older boys were to sea with
      father, an' the rest of us wa'n't born,” explained Mrs. Fosdick. “That
      next fall we all went to sea together. Mother was uncertain till the last
      minute, as one may say. The ship was waiting orders, but the baby that
      then was, was born just in time, and there was a long spell of extra bad
      weather, so mother got about again before they had to sail, an' we all
      went. I remember my clothes were all left ashore in the east chamber in a
      basket where mother'd took them out o' my chist o' drawers an' left 'em
      ready to carry aboard. She didn't have nothing aboard, of her own, that
      she wanted to cut up for me, so when my dress wore out she just put me
      into a spare suit o' John's, jacket and trousers. I wasn't but eight years
      old an' he was most seven and large of his age. Quick as we made a port
      she went right ashore an' fitted me out pretty, but we was bound for the
      East Indies and didn't put in anywhere for a good while. So I had quite a
      spell o' freedom. Mother made my new skirt long because I was growing, and
      I poked about the deck after that, real discouraged, feeling the hem at my
      heels every minute, and as if youth was past and gone. I liked the
      trousers best; I used to climb the riggin' with 'em and frighten mother
      till she said an' vowed she'd never take me to sea again.”
     </p>
<p>
      I thought by the polite absent-minded smile on Mrs. Todd's face this was
      no new story.
    </p>
<p>
      “Little Louisa was a beautiful child; yes, I always thought Louisa was
      very pretty,” Mrs. Todd said. “She was a dear little girl in those days.
      She favored your mother; the rest of you took after your father's folks.”
     </p>
<p>
      “We did certain,” agreed Mrs. Fosdick, rocking steadily. “There, it does
      seem so pleasant to talk with an old acquaintance that knows what you
      know. I see so many of these new folks nowadays, that seem to have neither
      past nor future. Conversation's got to have some root in the past, or else
      you've got to explain every remark you make, an' it wears a person out.”
     </p>
<p>
      Mrs. Todd gave a funny little laugh. “Yes'm, old friends is always best,
      'less you can catch a new one that's fit to make an old one out of,” she
      said, and we gave an affectionate glance at each other which Mrs. Fosdick
      could not have understood, being the latest comer to the house.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2H_4_0013" name="link2H_4_0013">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
