<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      VI. The Waiting Place
    </h2>
<p>
      “HOW DID YOU manage with the rest of that rough voyage on the Minerva?” I
      asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “I shall be glad to explain to you,” said Captain Littlepage, forgetting
      his grievances for the moment. “If I had a map at hand I could explain
      better. We were driven to and fro 'way up toward what we used to call
      Parry's Discoveries, and lost our bearings. It was thick and foggy, and at
      last I lost my ship; she drove on a rock, and we managed to get ashore on
      what I took to be a barren island, the few of us that were left alive.
      When she first struck, the sea was somewhat calmer than it had been, and
      most of the crew, against orders, manned the long-boat and put off in a
      hurry, and were never heard of more. Our own boat upset, but the carpenter
      kept himself and me above water, and we drifted in. I had no strength to
      call upon after my recent fever, and laid down to die; but he found the
      tracks of a man and dog the second day, and got along the shore to one of
      those far missionary stations that the Moravians support. They were very
      poor themselves, and in distress; 'twas a useless place. There were but
      few Esquimaux left in that region. There we remained for some time, and I
      became acquainted with strange events.”
     </p>
<p>
      The captain lifted his head and gave me a questioning glance. I could not
      help noticing that the dulled look in his eyes had gone, and there was
      instead a clear intentness that made them seem dark and piercing.
    </p>
<p>
      “There was a supply ship expected, and the pastor, an excellent Christian
      man, made no doubt that we should get passage in her. He was hoping that
      orders would come to break up the station; but everything was uncertain,
      and we got on the best we could for a while. We fished, and helped the
      people in other ways; there was no other way of paying our debts. I was
      taken to the pastor's house until I got better; but they were crowded, and
      I felt myself in the way, and made excuse to join with an old seaman, a
      Scotchman, who had built him a warm cabin, and had room in it for another.
      He was looked upon with regard, and had stood by the pastor in some
      troubles with the people. He had been on one of those English exploring
      parties that found one end of the road to the north pole, but never could
      find the other. We lived like dogs in a kennel, or so you'd thought if you
      had seen the hut from the outside; but the main thing was to keep warm;
      there were piles of bird-skins to lie on, and he'd made him a good bunk,
      and there was another for me. 'Twas dreadful dreary waitin' there; we
      begun to think the supply steamer was lost, and my poor ship broke up and
      strewed herself all along the shore. We got to watching on the headlands;
      my men and me knew the people were short of supplies and had to pinch
      themselves. It ought to read in the Bible, 'Man cannot live by fish
      alone,' if they'd told the truth of things; 'taint bread that wears the
      worst on you! First part of the time, old Gaffett, that I lived with,
      seemed speechless, and I didn't know what to make of him, nor he of me, I
      dare say; but as we got acquainted, I found he'd been through more
      disasters than I had, and had troubles that wa'n't going to let him live a
      great while. It used to ease his mind to talk to an understanding person,
      so we used to sit and talk together all day, if it rained or blew so that
      we couldn't get out. I'd got a bad blow on the back of my head at the time
      we came ashore, and it pained me at times, and my strength was broken,
      anyway; I've never been so able since.”
     </p>
<p>
      Captain Littlepage fell into a reverie.
    </p>
<p>
      “Then I had the good of my reading,” he explained presently. “I had no
      books; the pastor spoke but little English, and all his books were
      foreign; but I used to say over all I could remember. The old poets little
      knew what comfort they could be to a man. I was well acquainted with the
      works of Milton, but up there it did seem to me as if Shakespeare was the
      king; he has his sea terms very accurate, and some beautiful passages were
      calming to the mind. I could say them over until I shed tears; there was
      nothing beautiful to me in that place but the stars above and those
      passages of verse.
    </p>
<p>
      “Gaffett was always brooding and brooding, and talking to himself; he was
      afraid he should never get away, and it preyed upon his mind. He thought
      when I got home I could interest the scientific men in his discovery: but
      they're all taken up with their own notions; some didn't even take pains
      to answer the letters I wrote. You observe that I said this crippled man
      Gaffett had been shipped on a voyage of discovery. I now tell you that the
      ship was lost on its return, and only Gaffett and two officers were saved
      off the Greenland coast, and he had knowledge later that those men never
      got back to England; the brig they shipped on was run down in the night.
      So no other living soul had the facts, and he gave them to me. There is a
      strange sort of a country 'way up north beyond the ice, and strange folks
      living in it. Gaffett believed it was the next world to this.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What do you mean, Captain Littlepage?” I exclaimed. The old man was
      bending forward and whispering; he looked over his shoulder before he
      spoke the last sentence.
    </p>
<p>
      “To hear old Gaffett tell about it was something awful,” he said, going on
      with his story quite steadily after the moment of excitement had passed.
      “'Twas first a tale of dogs and sledges, and cold and wind and snow. Then
      they begun to find the ice grow rotten; they had been frozen in, and got
      into a current flowing north, far up beyond Fox Channel, and they took to
      their boats when the ship got crushed, and this warm current took them out
      of sight of the ice, and into a great open sea; and they still followed it
      due north, just the very way they had planned to go. Then they struck a
      coast that wasn't laid down or charted, but the cliffs were such that no
      boat could land until they found a bay and struck across under sail to the
      other side where the shore looked lower; they were scant of provisions and
      out of water, but they got sight of something that looked like a great
      town. 'For God's sake, Gaffett!' said I, the first time he told me. 'You
      don't mean a town two degrees farther north than ships had ever been?' for
      he'd got their course marked on an old chart that he'd pieced out at the
      top; but he insisted upon it, and told it over and over again, to be sure
      I had it straight to carry to those who would be interested. There was no
      snow and ice, he said, after they had sailed some days with that warm
      current, which seemed to come right from under the ice that they'd been
      pinched up in and had been crossing on foot for weeks.”
     </p>
<p>
      “But what about the town?” I asked. “Did they get to the town?”
     </p>
<p>
      “They did,” said the captain, “and found inhabitants; 'twas an awful
      condition of things. It appeared, as near as Gaffett could express it,
      like a place where there was neither living nor dead. They could see the
      place when they were approaching it by sea pretty near like any town, and
      thick with habitations; but all at once they lost sight of it altogether,
      and when they got close inshore they could see the shapes of folks, but
      they never could get near them,—all blowing gray figures that would
      pass along alone, or sometimes gathered in companies as if they were
      watching. The men were frightened at first, but the shapes never came near
      them,—it was as if they blew back; and at last they all got bold and
      went ashore, and found birds' eggs and sea fowl, like any wild northern
      spot where creatures were tame and folks had never been, and there was
      good water. Gaffett said that he and another man came near one o' the
      fog-shaped men that was going along slow with the look of a pack on his
      back, among the rocks, an' they chased him; but, Lord! he flittered away
      out o' sight like a leaf the wind takes with it, or a piece of cobweb.
      They would make as if they talked together, but there was no sound of
      voices, and 'they acted as if they didn't see us, but only felt us coming
      towards them,' says Gaffett one day, trying to tell the particulars. They
      couldn't see the town when they were ashore. One day the captain and the
      doctor were gone till night up across the high land where the town had
      seemed to be, and they came back at night beat out and white as ashes, and
      wrote and wrote all next day in their notebooks, and whispered together
      full of excitement, and they were sharp-spoken with the men when they
      offered to ask any questions.
    </p>
<p>
      “Then there came a day,” said Captain Littlepage, leaning toward me with a
      strange look in his eyes, and whispering quickly. “The men all swore they
      wouldn't stay any longer; the man on watch early in the morning gave the
      alarm, and they all put off in the boat and got a little way out to sea.
      Those folks, or whatever they were, come about 'em like bats; all at once
      they raised incessant armies, and come as if to drive 'em back to sea.
      They stood thick at the edge o' the water like the ridges o' grim war; no
      thought o' flight, none of retreat. Sometimes a standing fight, then
      soaring on main wing tormented all the air. And when they'd got the boat
      out o' reach o' danger, Gaffett said they looked back, and there was the
      town again, standing up just as they'd seen it first, comin' on the coast.
      Say what you might, they all believed 'twas a kind of waiting-place
      between this world an' the next.”
     </p>
<p>
      The captain had sprung to his feet in his excitement, and made excited
      gestures, but he still whispered huskily.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sit down, sir,” I said as quietly as I could, and he sank into his chair
      quite spent.
    </p>
<p>
      “Gaffett thought the officers were hurrying home to report and to fit out
      a new expedition when they were all lost. At the time, the men got orders
      not to talk over what they had seen,” the old man explained presently in a
      more natural tone.
    </p>
<p>
      “Weren't they all starving, and wasn't it a mirage or something of that
      sort?” I ventured to ask. But he looked at me blankly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Gaffett had got so that his mind ran on nothing else,” he went on. “The
      ship's surgeon let fall an opinion to the captain, one day, that 'twas
      some condition o' the light and the magnetic currents that let them see
      those folks. 'Twa'n't a right-feeling part of the world, anyway; they had
      to battle with the compass to make it serve, an' everything seemed to go
      wrong. Gaffett had worked it out in his own mind that they was all common
      ghosts, but the conditions were unusual favorable for seeing them. He was
      always talking about the Ge'graphical Society, but he never took proper
      steps, as I viewed it now, and stayed right there at the mission. He was a
      good deal crippled, and thought they'd confine him in some jail of a
      hospital. He said he was waiting to find the right men to tell, somebody
      bound north. Once in a while they stopped there to leave a mail or
      something. He was set in his notions, and let two or three proper
      explorin' expeditions go by him because he didn't like their looks; but
      when I was there he had got restless, fearin' he might be taken away or
      something. He had all his directions written out straight as a string to
      give the right ones. I wanted him to trust 'em to me, so I might have
      something to show, but he wouldn't. I suppose he's dead now. I wrote to
      him an' I done all I could. 'Twill be a great exploit some o' these days.”
     </p>
<p>
      I assented absent-mindedly, thinking more just then of my companion's
      alert, determined look and the seafaring, ready aspect that had come to
      his face; but at this moment there fell a sudden change, and the old,
      pathetic, scholarly look returned. Behind me hung a map of North America,
      and I saw, as I turned a little, that his eyes were fixed upon the
      northernmost regions and their careful recent outlines with a look of
      bewilderment.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2H_4_0007" name="link2H_4_0007">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
